## PDSB Final Project Essay

**1) Now that you have seen many full research projects saved online as GitHub repositories do you plan to use GitHub for your future projects as a way to store code and data in the cloud and to share your progress with others?**

I do! I see many publications which require very specific programs to process and visualize the data and it's always frustrating to see when the authors do not include a link to the programs they built or used in the publication. In the case of my PDSB project, it's not something that would show up in a publication since it's an interactive online map, but I think its a tool that's useful to make accessible to others. I think more people should create interactive figures like I did for this project. In general, people will remember a project or topic better if it's something they can interact with.

**2) Did you project accomplish the goals that you set out for yourself in your proposal? If not, why? What was the hardest problem in your project that were able to overcome? What, if any, was a problem that you were unable to overcome in your project within the given time?**

My proposal changed to an entirely different project but I had goals set for myself (that were not written on paper) that I did not complete. I completed adding population data and more interactivity to the reefs but I didn't get to adding the species pools for each reef. I spent way too many days trying to bugfix the issue with the 180th Meridian on Google Maps and was never able to figure out how to solve that issue. Because I focused so heavily on solving that, I didn't give myself enough time to add the functionality that I set out to include. I did, however, accomplish things that I didn't intend to originally. My original plan was to just embed an HTML file on my website but I realized that was very slow to load so instead I took the time and learned how to host my Bokeh app on a Heroku server. With my Heroku server set up, I'm planning to alter my project to use WMTS XYZ map tiles instead of Google Maps so that I'll no longer have the issue with the 180th Meridian. I originally avoided moving to the WMTS files because it made HTML files even slower to load on my website, but now that I have a Heroku server running, this isn't an issue and I can switch over very easily.

**3) Do you feel that you've learned the skills necessary perform data analysis in Python, and to write your own program or pipeline for data analysis? What skills do you think you need to work on further, and where would you look to find more information about learning these skills?**

**Yes**. I'm looking forward to using the skills I learned to process the genetic data I generate during my thesis project. This is a very specific application of what I learned in the class, and I'm more happy that I learned how to use Python in general. There have been plenty of times where I saw a cool tool online but shied away from it because it was on scary GitHub in scary `.py` format. But now I actually understand how these things work and I can utilize the programs I initially felt intimidated by. I think I still need to work on building my own apps and during this project I really learned that there's no better source for solving problems than good old Google.